The Instagram algorithms have changed.
There's a new Instagram algorithm.
Instagram algorithm update. Screw the
flipping algorithm. That's how I've been
feeling lately. And I'm going to guess
that you've been feeling the same way.
And if you're someone who wants to grow
their personal brand or business on
Instagram, then you're in the right
place because over the last 18 months or
so, I've unlocked an Instagram strategy
that essentially allows you to give the
middle finger to the Instagram
algorithm. And if you've been listening
to Build Your Tribe recently, then you
know that the secret to beating the
Instagram algorithm is
shares. If you haven't been a Build Your
Tribe subscriber, and maybe this is even
the first video that you're watching, I
want to say hello and welcome. And I
want to encourage you to press that
subscribe button because here on the
channel, every single Thursday, I put
out a new educational video helping you
understand how to grow and make money on
social media or within this digital
world. Now, not only have I been saying
that shares are the best form of
engagement for the last year or so, but
Adam Moseri, the head of Instagram, who
I recently had a sitdown interview with,
has been saying this himself recently,
too. He calls it sends per reach or
shares per reach, but it's basically all
the same thing, shares. And when I say
shares or sends, I'm essentially
referring to when one person sees a
post, sees a reel, and sends it to
another person. That is the key to
growth. That's the key to going viral.
That is what the algorithm prefers. But
like I said, that's also how you beat
the algorithm. And I say that that's how
you beat the algorithm because let's
strip away the robots. Let's strip away
the computers. Let's strip away the
algorithms and the technology that rules
our lives today and think about what is
a share. At the end of the day, a share
is one human being sending a post to
another human being or maybe a group of
human beings if you're sending it to
let's say your family group chat. It is
one person saying, "I thought of you.
This reminded me of you. This makes me
think of us. This totally resonates with
me or with us or reminds me of our
group." It is a powerful social
connection that transcends just
Instagram. For example, if you're
watching this YouTube video right now
and you think it's super educational,
super valuable, super useful, and you
send it to a friend saying, "Hey, you
got to check this out. This guy's got
some good stuff to share." Well, then
that's you adding value or giving
something, passing something along,
recommending something to a friend. This
is what we've been doing our whole lives
with our favorite TV shows, our favorite
books, our favorite comic books, our
favorite things. Part of being social
and part of being a friend is
recommending things that your friends
might also like. And so that's why while
today we're going to specifically be
talking about creating shareworthy
content on Instagram, creating
shareworthy content in general is how
you grow and it's how you reach more
people. And not only are you going to be
reaching more people, you're going to be
reaching the right kinds of people.
There are plenty of examples of posts
that go viral that reach tens of
millions of people, but it's the wrong
kinds of people. Maybe you've heard the
term, I'm on the wrong algorithm, or I
got on the wrong side of Instagram or
the wrong side of Tik Tok. It
essentially refers to when your content
gets picked up and gets pushed out to a
group of people who isn't exactly your
ideal or intended audience. And the
purpose of today's episode is not to
dive into the problems with going viral
and what happens when you reach the
wrong audience. You can figure that out
for yourself. But the cool thing about
shares is you are almost guaranteed to
reach the right audience. And that's
because again, regardless of what the
algorithm thinks of your content, if my
wife thinks your content is funny and
reminds her of my relationship with her
and she sends me that content, I am
another ideal viewer. So, you went from
one ideal viewer being my wife to the
second ideal viewer being me. Also, when
a post is shared, it is way more likely
to be viewed than when it's just
recommended by the algorithm. In fact,
the algorithms are built to have a
neverending stream of recommendations.
That's what the infinite scroll is built
upon. As you're scrolling through your
for you page on Tik Tok or your
Instagram feed, you're constantly going
to be recommended things that the
algorithm deems you may be interested
in. But of course, you're never going to
see all of them. On the other hand, you
are very likely to not just see, but
completely watch from start to finish
content that is sent to you by a friend
or a loved one or a colleague. Unless,
of course, we're talking about the DMs
that I have with my friend Skip, who
sends me literally 40 reels a day. Skip,
I love you, bro, but there's no way I'm
going to be able to watch every single
one of those. But not only on a human
level will shares get you more views,
but on an algorithmic level, most
algorithms are now trained to optimize
for shares. And nowhere is this more
true than the Instagram feed algorithm.
Reels, photos, and carousels are pushed
out to more people when they get shared
than arguably any other piece of content
on any other social media. In fact,
according to a recent Insta Club study,
getting one additional like on your post
will equate to about 15 additional
views. Getting one additional save on
your post will equate to about 45
additional views. Getting one comment on
your post will equate to about 75
additional views, but getting just one
additional share on your post will
equate to an average of about 150 extra
views. And some studies actually
indicate that getting just one share on
Instagram equates to 400 additional
views. So, while something that I say
all the time here at Build Your Tribe is
that we need to prioritize the audience
over the algorithm, creating shareworthy
content is a way that you can do both at
the same time. You can create
shareworthy content that your audience
enjoys watching and that they want to
send to their friends, families, and
colleagues, and the algorithm will
reward you for creating said shareworthy
content. Now, of course, if I were to
just tell you to create shareworthy
content and then peace out, this would
not be a very valuable podcast episode,
but I don't gatekeep. So, I'm going to
share with you the five different kinds
of shareworthy content, examples of each
and how to create them. And I think
you'll be surprised what is left off the
list. Number one, the first kind of
shareworthy content is motivational
content. Motivational content is a kind
of post that you can make over and over
again because motivation is something
that we all need on a regular, if not
daily, if not multiple times a day
basis. Choco Willink, the former Navy
Seal and author of one of my favorite
books, Extreme Ownership, says,
"Motivation is fleeting. Discipline is
reliable. Rely on discipline." That's
great, Joo. But on social media, we all
need to post motivational content
because chances are a lot of your
followers are in need of it. Now, the
key with motivational or inspirational
posts, and this is actually the key that
is true with all five of the different
kinds of shareworthy content is that
they need to relate to your niche. So,
rather than saying that over and over
again throughout today's episode, I just
need you to keep that in mind. All five
different kinds of shareworthy content
are going to be feed posts on Instagram.
All five of the different kinds of
shareworthy content should be related to
your niche in some way. They should be
relatable to your target audience in
some way. And the reason for that is
that when I'm discussing shareworthy
content on Instagram, I'm only talking
about feed posts. Feed posts are what
get shared. Rarely do Instagram stories
get shared. Yes, they can. Yes, there
are plenty of examples of that
happening. But for the most part, it's
disproportionately more that feed posts,
which is reals, photos, and carousels
are getting shared rather than Instagram
stories. So again, for all five
different kinds of shareworthy content,
including that first one that I already
told you, which is motivational content,
they need to be feed posts, so reals,
photos, or carousels, and they need to
be related to your niche. But back into
the idea of motivational content, this
is inspirational quotes. This is
powerful reminders. This is your
favorite scripture or Bible verses.
These are thoughtful messages or
reminders. And one of the best ways to
come up with motivational or
inspirational content is to just think
about what has motivated or inspired you
recently. Like what has really struck a
chord with you and really resonated,
really got you off your butt or lit that
fire underneath you. If there's any sort
of quotes or messages like that that uh
have come to mind recently that would
make a great motivational post. Here's a
few different examples of what
motivational content might look like.
This first one comes from an Insta Club
allstar. She is a therapist with over
100K followers on Instagram. And almost
all of her posts look just like this.
White background, black text, very
simple, something that you could make in
just a couple of minutes. and it has
some sort of motivational message or
daily affirmations and of course it's
relevant to her target audience. Here is
an inspirational post that I have made.
Uh black background, white text, again
very easy to make, very quick, very
simple and it says pretending to be
someone else on social media is a waste
of who you are. So that is a
motivational or inspiring message that
relates specifically to the idea of
growing on social media. This final
example comes from my good friend Jamie
Brindle. Definitely check out his page
if you are a freelancer. Um, but he said
you're not a vendor, you're a partner,
act like it when they say that's too
high. So, a little bit controversial
maybe, but definitely a great
inspirational message for anyone who is
a freelancer to remind them of their
value and their worth. And the thing
that I want you to take away from these
three examples and in all of the rest of
the examples that I show you today is
that number one, these are very quick
and easy to make. The focus is on the
value that they provide, not the vanity,
not how pretty or how polished or how
put together they are. In fact,
oftentimes just white text on a black
background or vice versa is good enough
to get the job done. So that's the first
kind of shareworthy content. The second
kind of shareworthy content is the kind
of content that is on one hand probably
the toughest to make and because of that
the kind of shareworthy post that you
will post the least often. But it's also
the kind of shareworthy post that has
the most viral potential. The kind of
shareworthy post that can really take
off and create a revolution or a
movement that can sweep across the
globe. And no, this isn't hyperbole. I'm
not exaggerating. The second kind of
shareworthy content is what I like to
call content. Call toarms content, also
known as community content, is content
that gets the bigger group involved.
It's not necessarily teaching something
or inspiring something. It's raising
awareness for a cause. It's raising
funds. It's uh spreading a certain
message that needs to be heard. The most
viral example of this that you are
definitely aware of is the ALS Ice
Bucket Challenge. Back in 2014, millions
upon millions of people were dumping
buckets of ice on their head. And it was
in order to raise funds and raise
awareness for ALS. But the reason that
this trend was so popular was not
because people were dumping buckets of
ice or because it was a good cause. The
reason this trend was so popular and is
to this day one of the most viral social
media campaigns for spreading awareness
was because part of the challenge was to
dump the bucket of ice on your head and
then tag three friends. Basically,
tagging three friends was sharing the
challenge with three other people. So
again, are you going to be able to
create an ALS ice bucket challenge for
your personal brand or business every
single month? Probably not. But if you
can do this even just once a year, it
can be absolutely revolutionary for your
growth and for your views. Of course,
besides the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge, I
will put up a few other examples on the
screen here. This first one is supposed
to look like a crumpled up receipt that
I have kind of flattened out and taken a
photo of. So, I'll pause right there and
say it feels very organic and real. It's
not just some text on a screen, but it
actually looks like something that's
that's out there in the real world. But
what this receipt says is it has a bunch
of line items saying that essentially it
costs nothing to support small
businesses on social media. And this,
like I said, is something I posted
numerous times. And every single time I
post it, it goes viral. Every single
time I post it, it is one of my best
posts for that month, if not for that
quarter, if not for that year. And the
reason is that it's trying to spread
this message, spread awareness that,
hey, we can all support each other and
all help each other out and it's not
going to cost us a dime. So, it's a
great cause and it's something that is
very pertinent, very relevant to my
niche. This next example is kind of
ironic. It's kind of meta. It's from a
post that I made where I was doing an
experiment specifically testing shares.
And I'll spoil the experiment for you.
Essentially, I had people share my own
reel with myself so that the additional
views of them sharing it with a friend
or a family didn't count. I was testing
to see would the algorithm push this
reel out to more people simply because
it was getting shared or would the
algorithm only push it out to more
people if it was getting shared with
more people and those more people were
viewing it and maybe sharing it
themselves. And so I had people share my
reel with me, send it back to myself, so
that it wasn't getting any additional
views from the recipients of the share
because again, the recipient of the
share was just me. Well, spoiler alert,
that reel went viral. That reel got
millions of views and it wasn't shared
with a bunch of other people. It was
pretty much only shared with me. But the
hook on that reel was what made it a
call to arms. I said, "I'm doing an
Instagram experiment and I need your
help." Simply that phrase, I need your
help, is a great way to cue people in
that you need their help and that you
are calling on the community for their
assistance. The third kind of
shareworthy content is the opposite of
the call to arms content because it's
the kind of content that we can think of
the easiest, the ones we post the most,
the ones we share most regularly, and
the kinds of content that you could
probably post on a daily basis and not
burn out. and that is none other than
relatable content. And specifically,
this usually takes the form of relatable
humor. Now, the deeper your
understanding for your target audience,
the more you can empathize with your
ideal follower, the more shareworthy
your content will be, the better your
posts will be, and more specifically,
the more relatable your posts will be.
When you can really empathize with their
pain points and know their struggles and
understand the funny quirks that people
in your niche do, you'll be able to
create more relatable content. And
relatability comes from specificity. So
rather than trying to be vague, rather
than trying to water down your specific
experiences or frustrations or whatever
to make it more broad appeal, be super
specific. The more specific your
relatable humor is, the funnier, the
more relatable it will be. I can't tell
you how many times I have seen a
hilarious, relatable joke on Tik Tok or
Instagram and I've looked at the
comments and all the top comments say,
"OMG, I thought I was alone. Do I not
have a single unique experience in my
life? Oh my gosh, I thought I was the
only one." And yet that post has 50,000
comments and a million likes, showing
that a million people feel the same way.
While yes, I understand you are your own
unique beautiful butterfly and no one is
quite like you and that's definitely
true. With that being said, we all as
humans have so many shared experiences
and behaviors and quirks and pain
points. And so when you're trying to
create relatable content, be as specific
as possible. Here's one example with a
clip from
Titanic. It's been 84
years. He exists
now only in my memory. Here's another
example I did. And this specific example
is one that you could use in any niche.
I made it related to how confusing the
Instagram algorithm is because that is
pertinent and relatable to my niche of
people who want to grow on Instagram.
But you could easily just come up with
your own confusing or overwhelming or
silly example of something that is
relevant to your niche and as long as
it's specific, it will be relatable. And
then here's a third and final example.
And for this one, I want you to notice
how specific this one is. And again,
this was something that was so specific.
My wife sent it to me and I was like,
"Oh my gosh, I can't believe other
people deal with this." The fourth kind
of shareworthy content is the one that's
the scariest to make, but the one that
can really help you stand out within
your niche and and grow your most loyal
group of super fans. And that is none
other than controversial content. When I
say controversial content, what I want
you to do is I want you to start being
rude, crass, offensive. I want you to
get cancelled. I want you to have
hundreds of people blocking you on a
date. No, I'm I'm kidding. I I'm not
encouraging you to do any of those
things. But what I am encouraging you to
do is to say the thing that no one else
is willing to say. Say the unpopular
opinion. Say the thing that you believe
that is counterculture. Say the thing
that everyone else in your niche has
been thinking, but no one else has been
bold enough to proclaim. You don't need
to go out and attack other businesses or
other people on social media. You can
just talk about ideas. You can talk
about strategies that everyone used to
think were super effective and you
actually don't think they're very
effective. You could talk about schools
of thought that you believe are
unhealthy or unhelpful. This kind of
content is so shareworthy because most
people are too scared to say it
themselves. They've been thinking it.
Maybe they've even been believing it for
years, but they've always been so scared
to say it. But now that you have finally
said it and you've said it so well and
so eloquently and you've planned it out
and put it in a piece of content, you've
made a real about it, well then they're
going to share it because it's a way
that they can say, "Hey, I believe in
this. I'm I'm too scared to say it
myself, but I believe in this. This is
how I think, too. This is what I
believe." And so it really is a great
way for your target audience to
self-identify, to self- select, and to
show your content to other people who
would be interested because you want to
know who your ideal followers are.
They're the people who think the exact
same way as the people who already
follow you. So be bold, be confident,
and share that controversial content.
Here are three examples of controversial
content, although I'm sure you can think
of plenty on your own. This first one is
a reel that just says, "I don't have
time." And then it argues how you
actually do have time. This second one
is a real from me that yes, also went
viral and it was kind of dispelling a
myth or a misconception about Instagram.
And then this final one quite simply
says unpopular opinion up at the top and
then it states its unpopular opinion.
Fifth and last but definitely not least
of the different kinds of shareworthy
content is timely content. Timely
content can mean a few different things.
Timely content can mean trends. Both
trending audios, trending memes, or just
more widespread trends. You could
consider the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge a
trend. You could consider B-roll reels a
trend. But timely content is not just
trends. Timely content is tapping into
pop culture as a whole. It's what I like
to call naps or niche adjacent posts.
And taking naps is a great way to
broaden your reach. One of the easiest
examples of a nap that I might take
myself is, let's say there was a really
popular show that was about to have its
season finale. And maybe not everyone,
but it felt like everyone was watching
the show. It's what everyone was talking
about. Let's say maybe it was Severance
at the beginning of 2025. Well, if I did
an Instagram review for a severance
character, or if I did a skit reel where
I was talking about how your inie uses
Instagram versus how your Audi uses
Instagram, that is relevant to something
that pop culture or the general
population as a whole is paying
attention to right now. And so it's a
great way to relate your niche to
something that is kind of adjacent or
even outside of your niche and is at the
same time popular or widely talked about
or in the news and thus reach a wider
audience. Speaking of the news, breaking
news or headlines is the third kind of
timely content. And you would be
surprised how many headlines there are
out there that might relate to your
niche and you could either talk about
them, address them, or literally be one
of the people to break the news
yourself. Here are three different
examples of timely content. The first
one is someone talking about the best
new features on the iPhone. The second
one is just a headline that says FDA
moved to ban formaldahhide in hair
straighteners called too little too
late. Well, if you're someone who's in
the hair care or the beauty industry,
you could totally make a real either
breaking this news or giving your
commentary, your feedback, your thoughts
on this news. And then the third one is
good old Taylor Swift. I would not
recommend using this meme nowadays
because it's not timely anymore. But
when this photo first came out, when
this photo was first taken about a year
and a half or 2 years ago, it was
everywhere and she was seemingly
inescapable. So using Taylor Swift memes
or Taylor Swift related content that
also pertains to your niche would be a
great way to tap into pop culture as a
whole. Now, I told you that you might be
surprised at what was left off this
list. And what was left off this list
was educational tips. Now, don't get me
wrong, educational tips, especially when
they're like the kind of wow, life hack
style tips can be very shareworthy, but
on average, usually educational tips,
valuable resources, knowledge is not
that shareworthy. Think about your local
library. There are likely dozens, if not
hundreds, if not thousands of textbooks
that are super valuable, super
educational, but have also been sitting
on the shelves of that library for
years, if not decades, collecting dust.
No one reading them, no one picking them
up, and definitely no one recommending
that textbook to a friend. Of course,
educational content is valuable.
Educational content has a purpose and
there are definitely ways to make your
educational content shareworthy or make
your educational content more
entertaining, but on average pure
education value and tips is not that
shareworthy. It's very savable. It's
very I'll save it for later, but it's
rarely the type of thing that gets sent.
I know earlier I joked about you sending
this podcast to a friend, but on average
long- form content like podcasts and
YouTube videos which are packed full of
knowledge and value and education aren't
shared at the same rate as short form
entertaining shareworthy content. So if
you're someone who wants to grow on
Instagram, you want to get more views,
maybe you even want to go viral, what I
would recommend is leaning into
shareworthy content and creating more of
it rather than focusing so much on
educational tips. Speaking of
educational tips, now that we have
completed the five different kinds of
shareworthy content, I want to share
with you five tips for creating
shareworthy content. And of course,
these are on top of all the tips that I
have already given about creating
quickly, about how relatability comes
from specificity, about how creating
content that feels more organic is going
to perform better than a overly curated
or overly polished graphic or highly
edited video. But besides all of that,
five tips that I have to share with you
on creating shareworthy content. Number
one is to always, of course, start with
a hook. Every post should start with a
hook. I would recommend spending the
majority of your time, energy, and
effort on creating better hooks. Now, if
you struggle with hooks, I have a free
guide linked up in the show notes down
below this episode with 25 viral hook
ideas. But my general recommendations
for your hooks is that you should keep
them simple by using fifth grade reading
level vocabulary. I don't know about
you, I haven't been in fifth grade in a
minute. So basically what I mean by this
tip is to keep it simple. Dumb it down.
Use easy to understand language. Not
because people are dumb, but because
most people are not paying attention
when they're scrolling on social media.
So keep it simple and also keep it
short. We've found that between five and
eight words is the ideal length for
viral hooks. And then my third tip for
your hooks is to use negative words
whenever possible. Negative words are
words like no, don't, stop, avoid,
cancel, give up. These sorts of words
grab our attention. It goes back to our
cave person brain where we're more
likely to pay attention to the tiger
that might kill us rather than the 50
butterflies that are cute and pretty. We
are trained. We are hardwired as human
beings to pay more attention to the
negative, the scary, the threatening.
And so you don't have to make every
single one of your reels super
aggressive or sensationalized. But using
negative words has been proven to be
more effective than using their positive
counterparts. Tip number two for your
shareworthy content is to tell people to
share it. But don't just say share this
post. Give them the reason why. Share
this post if you agree is a call to
action you could use on a controversial
post. Share this post if you can relate
is a call to action that you could use
on a relatable post. Share this post if
you learned something new is a call to
action that you could use on a timely
post. Share this post help spread the
message is something that you could use
on a call to arms post. And share this
post if you're feeling inspired is a
call to action that you could use on a
motivational post. Basically directly
ask people for the action that you want
them to take place and also give them
the reason why they should take that
action. Now, the best place for the call
to action would be in the post itself,
like on the screen or in the spoken
audio. But the second best place would
be just in your caption if it doesn't
organically or naturally fit into the
post. Tip number three for creating
shareworthy content is that success
leaves clues. But my warning here is
don't look at successful posts from
within your niche. Don't look at what
other competitors are doing and other
competitors are creating that is
shareworthy. Instead, look outside of
your niche. Look at different verticals,
different niches. Look at different
areas of social media and find the kind
of content that maybe you're sending to
your spouse, maybe that your friend is
sending to you, maybe that your
colleague just sent the group chat at
work. That sort of content is
shareworthy. It's proven because it's
already been shared. And just ask
yourself if there are ways that you can
take elements from that shareworthy post
and apply it to your own shareworthy
content within your niche. Tip number
four for creating shareworthy content is
something that we teach in the Insta
Club hub and that is the miniskirt rule.
The miniskirt rule is a way to answer
the question of how long should my posts
be. The answer is that your reels should
be like a miniskirt. They should be long
enough to cover what you need to cover
but still short enough to hold
attention. To say it another way, as my
good friend marketing Harry says, long
enough to cover the important bits, but
not any longer than that. Basically,
there is no oneizefits-all minikrt.
There is no one-sizefits-all length for
your Instagram reels. Instead, it should
be long enough to share the tips or the
value, the relatability, the
inspirational message, whatever it is
that you are posting about, but not any
longer, not redundant, not going over
the same thing over and over again or
saying the same sentence multiple ways,
kind of like I just did. And then the
fifth tip that I have for your
shareworthy posts, and this one is
specifically for your shareworthy
videos, is the 2C rule. The two-cond
rule comes from TV and cinema. And the
two-cond rule basically says that there
should be some sort of edit, change,
transition, or something happening every
2 seconds in order to keep our goldfish
brain paying attention to the video. If
you follow these five tips and you
create one of the five kinds of
shareworthy posts that I talked about in
today's episode, you will get more
shares, you will reach more people, you
will grow your following, and you will
grow your business because of it. And if
you learned absolutely anything at all
in today's podcast, I hope that you
apply it. I hope that you go out into
the world and you start creating
shareworthy content. And I also hope
that you hit that subscribe button so
that next Thursday's episode and all of
our future episodes automatically show
up in your app. Thank you so much for
watching andor listening today. I
appreciate you and as always, happy
networking.